(upbeat music)
Right, here it is.
This is the video on classes, prototypes, new,
and this keyword, these things are all connected,
that's why I'm sort of grouping them all together
and they're the foundation
for what is often called object-oriented programming.
Another popular version is functional programs.
So let's go through,
let's start with the new keyword and sort of understand how
that works and then we'll get into the rest of it.
So for this, we'll just open up a playground file.
So go to your playground folder,
make a new folder and we'll call this new-this.html.
Inside of that, you want your HTML base
and we'll call it new, this prototypes and classes,
and give yourself a script tag, console log, it works.
Open that up in the browser.
We're mostly going to be focusing on Dev Tools here
and then we'll go back and refactor
those two last exercises that we did.
Okay, so let's talk about the new keyword.
What is the new keyword?
You've seen us use it a couple of times.
You've seen us use it when we throw an error,
you've seen us use it when we create a date.
I've also showed you that you can create arrays
with the new array keyword, things like that.
So, let's talk about dates here.
If we may go ahead and make a new date.
So const, my date is equal to new capital D date,
and then you pass that, August 11, 2025.
Now if I were to console log my date, see what we got here.
You just get sort of like a string that is in there.
If we make console.dir that instead
you'll see that we have our date and inside of that
there is a prototype of tons and tons
and tons of different methods, okay?
Okay, so that works so far.
So if I were to duplicate this and console log
mydate.getfullyear, refresh, you see 2025,
where did this come from?
Where did this method get full year come from?
Same thing when we create an array,
we automatically have all of these new methods like pop,
push and slice and splice and all of those methods
that we learned about, like where do those come from?
Well this is because when you create a date
or you create an object, when you create an array,
when you create a number, when you create a string,
when you create any of these things,
we are essentially creating a new object in JavaScript
that is extended off what I like to call the Maba object
or the proper word is probably from the constructor.
So if we take a look at all of the types that we have,
so array, that's just a function, object,
that's just a function date, number,
these are all just functions that when they are run
with the new keyword in front of it
will return to you an object.
And that's why we say everything in JavaScript is an object.
Because even though a number is just a number,
when we create a new number
on that, let's store that in a variable.
My number is equal to
then we have my number
and you'll see that there are a bunch of methods
that exists on it.
So that's what we mean when we say everything
in JavaScript is an object because even things
that are numbers, are a type of number,
they also are an object,
meaning that they are packed
with all of these little methods for working with it.
Okay, so (clearing throat) let's go back to this date here
and keep going with it.
Because we are creating a new date here,
we actually have this my date variable
that is an instance of date.
And remember if we go back here and we were to type,
type of
my date, we get object.
But if we say my date instance of capital D date,
it will tell us true.
So date is an object
but it is an instance of the special object
that we have in our browser that is called a date.
So same thing with an array.
If we create a new array, so const names is equal to
Wes and Kait
and we take a look here.
So we have names,
Type of
names is an object because an array is not a type.
An array is just a special kind of object.
But if we say names is an instance of the array,
you'll see that it is true
because names is an instance of an array, okay.
This might be a little bit confusing
because you don't see us using the new keyword right here
when we create an array.
Same thing when you create an object like this,
name is equal to Wes, you might be saying like, okay,
why are we able to use that instance of here
when we don't use a new keyword?
Because these are what are referred to as literal syntax.
This is the object, this, sorry.
This is the array literal syntax
and this is the object literal syntax.
And it's the same thing as doing something like this.
New, array and I think you pass it in array like that
and same thing here, new object,
you pass it, your objects there.
And this should be the same thing.
So names, it's an array of an array.
Okay, so we don't need that.
So you could see how often I use this syntax.
I don't even know how it works.
But let's take a look, refresh that, there we go,
that's our normal array and then we take a look at Wes
and it looks like a normal object.
So the only difference between those two is that
it's just a bit of a shorter syntax.
Some of the other things like dates don't have
a literal syntax, meaning that's why we have to stick
that new keyword in front of it.
Same thing when you create an element.
So we'll say con span is equal to document.create element
you have a span in there.
If I were to console log the span,
see we have our span there.
If we were to take a look at, we say span, instance of,
remember capital E element from that last one,
it will say true.
Why?
Because element was the base one
and span is the instance that we have there.
Now why didn't we use new element here?
Well let's just go ahead and look at the MDN doc.
Here I am on the document.create element.
It says here this method creates the HTML element
specified by tag name or an HTML unknown element
if a tech name isn't recognized,
that's because you can make up your own elements.
But what we have to look at
is what happens when we create a span.
Well, we can actually take a look and say span.constructor,
and what that will do is it will give us
a single HTML span element.
Now, so if I type span instance of HTML span element,
we also get true.
And then if I say span instance of a node,
So like what's going on here?
Is it an element?
Is it a span, is it a node?
And this is going a little bit ahead of ourselves,
but we'll learn about this when we hit classes.
But essentially things can start at a very basics,
like a node can have texts,
and then it can go a little bit further
and become an element
and it could have like a tag and attributes.
And then it can go a little bit further
and become a special kind of an element,
like a span or an image or a div and all of these things,
the element inherits the node
and the span element inherits the element.
They get a little bit more specific
and that is what is referred to as extending
and we'll go to that when we run into our classes.
So to answer our question,
why don't we use new in front of this
is because document.create element under the hood,
we'll say new element or new HTML element
or new HTML span element for us.
So let's build our own to hopefully get a bit of
a better grasp on this.
And let's make a pizza.
How do you feel about that?
We'll make a function capital P pizza
and then we will just console log making a pizza.
Now what we've done there is we have created
the ability to create a new pizza.
So what we can do here is if we were
to say const pepperoni pizza,
and let's use it without the new keyword,
just see what we get, pizza, okay.
And we'll console log pepperoni,
pepperoni pizza,
refresh this.
We get undefined, okay.
That makes sense because this function
didn't return anything.
But if I create a new pizza by putting the new keyword
in front of that, you'll see that we get a pizza object
with nothing in it because we haven't done anything.
So what happens is that
when you use the new keyword on a function,
it creates a new instance object of that function
instead of whatever has been returned from that function.
So by using, I'll say it one more time
'cause this is a bit confusing,
by using the new keyword in JavaScript
that creates a new object
that is an instance of
whatever function you have made it from.
Now that will make a lot more sense when we get into this,
when you get into constructors and we get into classes.
But so far that's what we need to know about that.
We can take it a little bit further
and take a look at this pizza and we can say .constructor
and the constructor will tell us what function made me.
And it'll go here, you see,
it will tell us what function made me.
Same thing if we go to our span
and we look at the constructor,
it'll tell us that the thing
that made me was the HTML span element function.
And finally we can say pepperoni pizza is an
instance of pizza,
now we see true because it is, right?
So that is new keyword.
Let's take a break there
and jump into this keyword in the next one.